Sync up6 branch with master (#7040)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website: swan-lake/learn-the-platform/ballerina-persist/persist-client-api.md

---
layout: ballerina-persist-documentation-left-nav-pages-swanlake
title: Persist Client API

> description: The sections gives details on the generated Persist Client API.

Author: ```suggestion
description: The sections give details on the generated Persist Client API.
```
Need a better description for better SEO on the Google search.

keywords: ballerina, programming language, ballerina packages, persist, persist client, persist client api
permalink: /learn/ballerina-persist/persist-client-api/
active: persist_client_api

> intro: Persist client is used to perform CRUD operations on the data source. Each entity type will have five resource methods for each operation. The resource methods are get, get(get by identity), post, put, and delete. Persist CLI tool will generate the derived Entity Types and the Clients from the model definition.

Author: ```suggestion
intro: The Persist Client is used to perform CRUD operations on the data source. Each entity type will have five resource methods for each operation. The resource methods are `get`, `get(get by identity)`, `post`, `put`, and `delete`. The Persist CLI tool will generate the derived entity types and the clients from the model definition.
```
Shall we remove the sentence with the words within backticks out of the intro as backticks will not be rendered properly when they are added in the front matter.

> redirect_from:

Author: ```suggestion
redirect_from:
```
Why do we need redirections as these are new content?

- /learn/ballerina-persist/persist-client-api
---

> ## Derived Entity Types

Author: ```suggestion
## Derived entity types
```

Ballerina record types used in the generated clients are derived from the entity types defined in the data model.

> Example of a defined entity,

Author: ```suggestion
Below is an example of a defined entity.
```

```ballerina
type Workspace record {|
    readonly string id;
    string workspaceType;
    Building location; // 1-n relation (parent)
    Employee? employees; // 1-1 relation (child)
|};
```

> There are six types of derived entity types:

Author: ```suggestion
There are six derived entity types as follows
```

> 1. Entity Types  

Author: ```suggestion
### `Entity` types  
```
Shall we add the types as sub headings? Can give a full list and then ad sub-sections for each as we have a considerable list of 6.

>     These are the types defined in the data model. These are used to indicate the data structure in the data source. The entity who is the association parent will include the foreign key field(s).

Author: ```suggestion
    These are the types defined in the data model. They are used to indicate the data structure in the data source. The entity, which is the association parent will include the foreign key field(s).
```

    ```ballerina
    public type Workspace record {|
        readonly string id;
        string workspaceType;
        string locationCode;
    |};
    ```
    

> 2. Insert Types

Author: ```suggestion
### `Insert` types
```

>     These are the records used to insert data in the data source. This is same as the Entity Type.

Author: ```suggestion
    These are the records used to insert data in the data source. This is the same as the entity type.
```
It is not clear what is same as the entity type. If they are the same as entity types, why do we name them in a different type?

    ```ballerina
    public type WorkspaceInsert Workspace;
    ```

> 3. Update Types

Author: ```suggestion
### `Update` types
```

>     These are the records used to update data in the data source. These are entity types without the identity fields. All fields will be optional. Only the fields for which values are provided will be updated.

Author: ```suggestion
    These are the records used to update data in the data source. They are entity types without identity fields. All fields will be optional. Only the fields for which values are provided will be updated.
```

    ```ballerina
    public type WorkspaceUpdate record {|
        string workspaceType?;
        string locationCode?;
    |};
    ```
   

> 4. Optionalized Types

Author: ```suggestion
### `Optionalized` types
```

>     These are the same as the Entity Types, but all the fields are made optional. This type is not directly used in any operations.

Author: ```suggestion
    These are the same as the entity types but all the fields are made optional. This type is not directly used in any operations.
```

    ```ballerina
    public type WorkspaceOptionalized record {|
        readonly string id?;
        string workspaceType?;
        string locationCode?;
    |};
    ```
   

> 5. With Relations Types

Author: ```suggestion
### `With-relations` types
```

>     This types inherits all fields from the corresponding `Optionalized` type, and adds the relation fields as optional. This type is not directly used in any operations.

Author: ```suggestion
    These types inherit all fields from the corresponding `optionalized` type and add the relation fields as optional. They are not directly used in any operations.
```
Should be either `relational fields` or `related fields`.

Reviewer: Let's keep as `relation` fields

    ```ballerina
    public type WorkspaceWithRelations record {|
        *WorkspaceOptionalized;
        BuildingOptionalized location?;
        EmployeeOptionalized employees?;
    |};
    ```

> 6. Target Types

Author: ```suggestion
### `Target` types
```

>     This type is used to retrieve data from the data source. If the entity contains a relation field, the target type 

Author: ```suggestion
    These types are used to retrieve data from the data source. If the entity contains a relation field, the target type 
```
Should be either `relational fields` or `related fields`.

    will be a type description of the corresponding `WithRelations` type. Otherwise, the target type will be a 

>     type description of the corresponding `Optionalized` type.

Author: ```suggestion
    type description of the corresponding `optionalized` type.
```

    ```ballerina
    public type WorkspaceTargetType typedesc<WorkspaceWithRelations>;
    ```
    

> ### Persist Clients

Author: ```suggestion
### Persist Clients
```
Should this be a level 2 heading? Please check the heading levels on all the pages.

> ### Persist Clients

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Persist Clients
```

> Persist Clients are derived for each data model definition file. The client is used to perform CRUD operations on the data source. Each entity type will have five resource methods for each operation. The resource methods are get, get(get by identity), post, put, and delete.

Author: ```suggestion
Persist Clients are derived for each data model definition file. The client is used to perform CRUD operations on the data source. Each entity type will have five resource methods for each operation. The resource methods are `get`, `get(get by identity)`, `post`, `put`, and `delete`.
```
This is the same as the intro. Can we remove duplicated content by removing or rewording appropriately?

> The skeleton of the Persist client is as follows,

Author: ```suggestion
The skeleton of the Persist client is as follows.
```

> ```ballerina

Author: ```suggestion
```ballerina
```
Should we add comments to this code? Also, need to check formatting of all the code snippets in all files.

public client class Client {
    *persist:AbstractPersistClient;

    public function init() returns persist:Error? {
    }

    isolated resource function get workspaces(WorkspaceTargetType targetType = <>) returns stream<targetType, Error?> {
    };

    isolated resource function get workspaces/[string id](WorkspaceTargetType targetType = <>) returns targetType|Error {
    };

    isolated resource function post workspaces(WorkspaceInsert[] data) returns string[]|persist:Error {
    };

    isolated resource function put workspaces/[string id](WorkspaceUpdate data) returns Workspace|persist:Error {
    };

    isolated resource function delete workspaces/[string id]() returns Workspace|persist:Error {
    };

    public function close() returns persist:Error? {
    }
}
```

> The conventions used in deriving the Persist client are as follows:

Author: ```suggestion
The conventions used in deriving the Persist client are as follows.
```

> 1. Since there can be only one generated client in a Ballerina package, the Client name is always `Client`.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Since there can be only one generated client in a Ballerina package, the client name is always `Client`.
```

2. The client should be of the `persist:AbstractPersistClient` type.

> 3. It should contain `init()` and `close()` functions.

Author: ```suggestion
3. It should contain the `init()` and `close()` functions.
```

> 4. It should contain five resource methods for each entity type defined in the data model. Resource methods are get, get(get by identity), post, put, and delete.

Author: ```suggestion
4. It should contain five resource methods (i.e., `get`, `get(get by identity)`, `post`, `put`, and `delete` for each entity type defined in the data model. 
```

> 5. Resource names are plural form of lowercase entity names.

Author: ```suggestion
5. Resource names should be in the plural form of the entity names in lowercase.
```

6. The resource method should return the derived entity types.

> 7. Resource method with path parameters will support composite identity field by having multiple path parameters.

Author: ```suggestion
7. Resource methods with path parameters will support composite identity fields by having multiple path parameters.
```

> ### Persist Client Usage

Author: ```suggestion
### Persist Client usage
```

> #### Client Initialization

Author: ```suggestion
#### Client initialization
```
All titles should be in sentence case. Please check all titles on all the pages.

The `init()` function is used to initialize the client. The client will be initialized with the data source configuration provided in the `Config.toml` file. The `init()` function will return an error if the client initialization fails.

> You can initialize the client like this:

Author: ```suggestion
You can initialize the client as follows.
```

```ballerina
Client sClient = check new();
```

> #### CRUD Operations

Author: ```suggestion
#### CRUD operations
```

> you can perform CRUD operations on the `Workspace` table in the data store using the client object, like this:

Author: ```suggestion
you can perform CRUD operations on the `Workspace` table in the data store using the client object as follows.
```

```ballerina

> // Create a new workspace record

Author: ```suggestion
// Create a new workspace record.
```

WorkspaceInsert workspace = {id: "WK001", workspaceType: "Host Desk", locationCode: "B001"};
string[]|error workspaceId = sClient->/workspaces.post([workspace]);

> // Get the workspace record with id WK001

Author: ```suggestion
// Get the workspace record with the ID: `WK001`.
```

Workspace|error workspace = sClient->/workspaces/WK001;

// Update the workspace record with id WK001
Workspace|error updated = sClient->/workspaces/WK001.put({workspaceType: "Cubical"});

> // Delete the workspace record with id WK001

Author: ```suggestion
// Delete the workspace record with the ID: `WK001`.
```

Workspace|error deleted = sClient->/workspaces/WK001.delete();

> // Get all the workspace records

Author: ```suggestion
// Get all the workspace records.
```

stream<Workspace, error?> workspaces = sClient->/workspaces;
```

> #### Relation Operations

Author: ```suggestion
#### Relation operations
```
Should this be either `Related operations` or `Relational operations`?

> You can perform relation operations on the `Workspace` table in the data store using the client object, like this:

Author: ```suggestion
You can perform relation operations on the `Workspace` table in the data store using the client object as follows.
```
Should this be either `Related operations` or `Relational operations`?

Let's extend the `Workspace` entity type with a relation field `employees` as follows,
```ballerina
type Workspace record {|
    readonly string id;
    string workspaceType;
    Building location; // 1-n relation (parent)
    Employee? employees; // 1-1 relation (child)
|};

type Employee record {|
    readonly string id;
    string firstName;
    string lastName;
    string email;
    float salary;
    Workspace workspace; // 1-1 relation (parent)
|};

type Building record {|
    readonly string code;
    string name;
    string address;
    Workspace[] workspaces; // 1-n relation (child)
|};
```

> You can retrieve Workspace record with the related Employee record by using a custom target type as follows, This is equivalent to a SQL join operation between the `Workspace` and `Employee` tables.

Author: ```suggestion
You can retrieve Workspace records with the related `Employee` record by using a custom target type as follows. This is equivalent to an SQL `join` operation between the `Workspace` and `Employee` tables.
```

```ballerina

> // Get the workspace record with id WK001 with the related employee record

Author: ```suggestion
// Get the workspace record with the ID `WK001` with the related employee record.
```

WorkspaceWithEmployee|error workspace = sClient->/workspaces/WK001.get();

> // WorkspaceWithEmployee is a record with the following fields

Author: ```suggestion
// `WorkspaceWithEmployee` is a record with the following fields.
```

type WorkspaceWithEmployee record {|
    readonly string id;
    string workspaceType;
    string locationCode
    Employee employees; // 1-1 relation (child)
|};
```

> This same as write write the following SQL query to retrieve data from MySQL database,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This same as writing the following SQL query to retrieve data from MySQL database,
```

```sql
SELECT * 
FROM workspace w
INNER JOIN employee e ON w.id = e.workspaceId
WHERE w.workspaceId = 'WK001';
```

> The persisted client will automatically perform the join operation and return the result.

Author: ```suggestion
The persisted client will automatically perform the `join` operation and return the result.
```

> #### Projection Operations

Author: ```suggestion
#### Projection operations
```

> You can retrieve Workspace record with the related Employee record and the related Building record by using a custom target type. When specifying the target type, you can specify the target type with subset of fields of the entity types as follows, 

Author: ```suggestion
You can retrieve the `Workspace` records with the related `Employee` record and the related `Building` record by using a custom target type. When specifying the target type, you can specify the target type with a subset of fields of the entity types as follows.
```

> This is equivalent to a SQL join operation between the `Workspace`, `Employee` and `Building` tables and also a SQL projection operation.

Author: ```suggestion
This is equivalent to an SQL `join` operation between the `Workspace`, `Employee`, and `Building` tables, and also an SQL `projection` operation.
```

```ballerina

> // Get the workspace record with id WK001 with the related employee record and the related building record

Author: ```suggestion
// Get the `workspace` record with the ID `WK001` with the related `employee` record and the related `building` record.
```
Should the first letter be capital of the words within backticks? They need to be consistent throughout.

WorkspaceWithRelations|error workspace = sClient->/workspaces/WK001.get();

// WorkspaceWithRelations is a record with the following fields
type WorkspaceWithRelations record {|
    string workspaceType;
    record {|
        string firstName;
        string lastName;
    |} employees; // 1-1 relation (child)
    record {|
        string name;
        string address;
    |} location; // 1-n relation (parent)
|};
```

> This same as write write the following SQL query to retrieve data from MySQL database,

Author: ```suggestion
This is the same as writing the following SQL query to retrieve data from a MySQL database.
```
This should be a typo.

```sql
SELECT w.workspaceType, e.firstName, e.lastName, b.name, b.address
FROM workspace w
INNER JOIN employee e ON w.id = e.workspaceId
INNER JOIN building b ON w.locationCode = b.code
WHERE w.workspaceId = 'WK001';
```

> The persist client will automatically perform the join and projection operations on the data source and return the result.

Author: ```suggestion
The Persist Client will automatically perform the `join` and `projection` operations on the data source and return the result.
```
